---
layout: longform
category: writing
title: (Why Is Ralph Ellison So) Black and Blue? 
subtitle: An Existentialist Analysis of Invisible Man's Prologue
---

Ralph Ellison’s Invisible Man may well be one of the finest, most influential African-American novels of the 20th century. It is one abundant in symbolism, lurid descriptions and literary genius inside every page. To begin to analyze it all is a battle long lost, especially since the thought process of such protean authors as Ellison is often hard to capture and impossible to recreate. To do so for the entire novel would be an exercise in futility, simply because it is impossible to decode the meaning behind all the themes and motifs in the chaotic jungle of Harlem and decipher exactly what these mean to the author. Because of this, in this essay, I will limit myself to exploring the undercurrent of existentialist sentiment that permeates the novel; moreover, to retain my sanity, I will limit the scope of the essay to the prologue, which one could say is so riddled in clues and meanings that it could be considered a detached entity in the form of a masterful short story.

####What is Existentialism?####

It seems appropriate to define existentialism first before examining its proximity and role in the text. One of the most influential movements of the twentieth century, Existentialism can be primarily attributed to Rene Descartes, whose cogito ergo sum argument made an important distinction between epistemology and ontology (Bushey, p.1), by stating that one’s ability to contemplate his existence in turn solidifies it. 


By extension, existentialism’s theoretical underpinnings negotiate the perception of the self and of the individual’s placement in society, leading to its central propositions which revolve around the significance of the individual and the freedom and importance of choice. That is, how a person’s choices and freedoms lead him to define his existence. A common pattern in the theory of existentialism is that existence precedes essence, a belief which emphasizes a responsible, conscious being that acts independently, as opposed to roles, stereotypes, definitions, or other preconceived categories the individual fits (Crowell). Subsequently, an individual’s freedom is reliant on a rebellion from society and the conformity that it entails.


Prevalent also is the notion of despair, the loss of hope. Yet what differentiates existentialist despair from the conventional definition is that it formulates a state the individual is in, in reaction to a breakdown in one or more of the defining qualities of one’s self or identity. So, as long as a person’s identity depends on qualities that can crumble, he is in incessant despair. Both the perpetuity of the protagonist’s despair, as well as his quest to define the meaning of his existence outside the constrictive expectations that society imposes on him, constitute the novel’s major themes.


####Existentialism’s Relevance in the Post-War Reality####

In order to start examining the novel’s ties with existentialism, one must first consider the time-frame it was written in, which coincided with the post-war disillusionment period following World War II. The popular sentiments and widespread disenchantment brought forth questions pertaining to man’s position in society, which were amplified by the prevalence of injustice, collapse of values, and rise of totalitarianism (Finkelstein, p.12). It was this environment around 1945, as well as Ellison’s estrangement with the Communist Party that gave birth to the book. This detachment on Ellison’s behalf in conjunction with his departure from the ethnically-heavier literary style of his mentor, Richard Wright, led to a journey into self for Invisible Man’s author as well, and the fecundity of this search divulged a plethora of aspects and introspective motifs to the book.


####Existentialism in Invisible Man####

In light of this, the discussion of Invisible Man in an existentialist context is frequently made. The book, published in 1952, immediately became one of the “quintessential American picaresques of the 20th century” (Lacayo, par.1). It dealt with, and was not limited to, issues such as the identity of African-Americans, the reformist racial policies of Booker T. Washington and the political turmoil, not only in Harlem, but in all of the United States. Invisible Man evades the simplistic classification of a bildungsroman and transcends into a an impressively comprehensive and viscerally direct snapshot of the events it depicts. Inside the novel, motifs of self-identification and conformity, which are prevalent and incandescent, work to highlight a “striking juxtaposition of the richness of African-American life within the hollowness of a larger society” (Bercovitch, p.175). The ever-present background to all these notions is the narrator’s belief, evident through his actions, that existence precedes essence. In that manner, Ralph Ellison does not concentrate on the “contour and clash of personalities, but on the loss of personality in a world which trivializes individual differences” (Bercovitch, p.163). This forms the ideal basis for one to analyze the prologue (as well as the rest of the novel) through existentialist lens.


####The prologue####

The prologue is abundant in symbolism and, in terms of meaning, provides possibly the most insight in the mind of the narrator when compared to the rest of the book. What facilitates this fruitfulness of expressiveness is the fact that Ellison starts off the novel at the very end; by making use of such a non-linear narrative, he frames the beginning and end of the novel and immortalizes its very essence. The narrator himself makes the logical conclusion, that the world, and subsequently, time, moves “not like an arrow but like a boomerang” (Ellison, p.6). The end is the beginning, as history always returns to its origins, travelling in a circular path. 


When the narrator denounces his “invisibility”, he involves the reader in the questioning of the self, in a manner that is immediately revealed and cryptically explained. We are thus introduced to two of the major themes Ellison revisits time and time again in his novel. One pertains to his invisibility, and the other to other people’s blindness (SparkNotes Editors, par. 7). 

The protagonist’s invisibility stems from his skin color, which ultimately is his essence. A genetic predisposition one has no control over and cannot change, obliquely dictates his persona. Other people’s obliviousness to his existence indicates that they do not consider him on equal terms; they wish he didn’t exist, and in time they become blind to his presence by refusing to see him. It therefore makes sense that we analyze the duality and codependence between these two meanings: the narrator is invisible because of the blindness of his peers, and the unwillingness of everyone else to see him is due to the fact that he does not exist in their eyes. 


This invisibility has made him question his own existence. His aggravated, frantic, efforts to make himself visible to others are fruitless. Thus, he succumbs into a reality that sucks him in and won’t let him escape. So much so in fact, that this reality becomes both a prison and a safe-house, and worst of all, the narrator can’t tell the two apart. In other words, the Invisible Man becomes a captive of his own invisibility. 


It is easy to find the parallels between Ellison’s metaphors and key existentialist ideas, particularly those that comprise of the central maxim of existence preceding essence. The narrator refuses to be defined as another coal on the pile, based on the color of his skin or other stereotypes and labels that society attaches to individuals. He wants to free himself from these constraints and make his own history through his free will. He desires to define himself outside the castigating imperatives and their obliterating effect on an individual’s psyche.


On the other hand, these imperatives are what define the narrator’s essence - an essence which is cast on him by external entities, and fundamentally constitutes his being. Without essence, the narrator has no identity (Crowell, par.5). Without essence, he is an amorphous mass with no meaning and purpose. Throughout the prologue, Ellison is constantly alluding to the notion of essence and the narrator’s struggle to escape the demands and expectations that society has registered on his persona, and believes inherently to be true. To society, the narrator’s existence is similar to the “bodiless heads you see sometimes in circus sideshows” (Ellison, p.3). He is identified as a circus freak; so eerie, otherworldly, alien, and uncomfortable in appearance that spectators are unable to associate him with a human being, for they are turned off by the notion that he could be existentially similar to them. It is as if he is surrounded by “mirrors of hard, distorting glass”, and when they approach him all they see is “his surroundings, themselves, or figments of their imagination” (Ellison, p.3). In his person, they reflect their own perceptions and preconceptions of what it is that they should be recognizing, thus failing to identify, or indeed see, his true existence.

####Encounter with Blond Man####

This results in society’s obliviousness and, in turn, blindness to his presence. An ignorance so intense that the narrator becomes invisible to them, as we are told when the narrator recounts his altercation with a tall blond man. He accidentally bumps into him and is enraged when the man calls him what we can only assume to be a racial epithet. This infuriates the narrator so much that he almost kills him, before realizing that the man is merely sleepwalking through a “bad dream”; for, to him, the narrator’s presence is not only seemingly a figment of his imagination, but also as intangible as the spirit of a dream-like figure. The narrator wonders who the victim and the assailant is in this case: “He bumped me, he insulted me. […] He, let us say, was lost in a dream world. But didn’t he control the dream world – which, alas is only too real! – And didn’t he rule me out of it?” (Ellison, p.14). It turns out that not only he, but the entire world reacts in such a way to his (non)-existence, as is evident by next days newspapers, which describe the incident as a mugging. A mugging by an invisible man! (Ellison, p.5)


The significance of this pivotal encounter in the prologue in defining the narrator’s presence/existence should not be understated. It is at that point that it is made clear that the obliteration of his identity, and subsequently his dehumanization can occur by something as seemingly trivial as a single word (SparkNotes Editors, par.9). The blond man, who could be said to represent society, by virtue of muttering a racial epithet, forces the narrator to assume all the connotations of such word, and adopt an alien identity. He thus becomes amorphous, nebulous, and invisible. By the staccato utterance of a single word, the narrator is coerced into giving up his individuality, that is to say his existence, and thus he is fettered to conform to the will of an intolerant, ignorant society. It is for this reason that the narrator chooses to hibernate; to escape the outside world and flee in his underground room, where he is free from labels and social constraints, in order to find the meaning of his individual existence.

####The importance of identity in existentialism####

Ellison states that “blackness is invisibility” (Ellison, 13) and invisibility has the power to drain vitality (“It’s enough to make you doubt if you really exist”). The antidote to this is the self-identity (Corn, par.1), which the narrator tries so hard to find. In a conceptually existential level, it is also the meaning of his existence. Ellison himself strenuously denied that Invisible Man was a “protest novel” in a Paris Review interview from 1955 (Alfred, par.15). Even though it can be construed as such, he stated that his concern was with the universal minority: the individual (Lavalle). In its entirety, Invisible Man is a journey into self, and this provides a very powerful claim to its existentialist nature.


In the prologue, we find the Invisible Man has retreated underground in order to find the complete freedom he needs to determine his destiny, a concept in many ways similar to Dostoyevsky’s Notes From the Underground, where a segregated, alienated outsider “chews nervously on his bitter thoughts” (Berkovitch, p.138). His quest for meaning permeates his entire life and each action defines his identity and future actions (Bushey,  p.2). Just like Meursault in Albert Camus’ The Stranger (the epitome of an existentialist novel), the Invisible Man comes to the realization, that ultimately, he must create meaning in his own life (Bushey, p.2), and reject conformity (McCarthy, p.25) and other impositions of society.


####Finding the meaning of his existence####

The Invisible Man does just that. In the process of waging spiritual war against the outside world, he, unlike in the incident with the blond man, admits that most of the time he is “is not overtly violent”. He moreover reaps the benefits of his invisibility “so as not to awaken the sleeping ones” and secludes himself physically via his underground retreat, and also spiritually, by accepting his invisibility. In doing so, he enables himself to pursue the meaning of his being without the interventions and restrictions of the outside world. Besides, as the narrator notes, there are “few things in the world as dangerous as sleepwalkers” (Ellison, p.5), alluding to the world’s constricting and obliterating effects on one’s individuality.


Leveraging his invisibility, he carries on a fight with Monopolated Light & Power, from which he steals electricity in order to illuminate his house with lights brighter than Broadway or “the Empire State Building on a photographer’s dream night”. By doing so, he forces the company to acknowledge his existence, and yet preempts responses of any sort from them by being invisible (SparkNotes Editors, par.10). His magnificently lit hole underground is thus funded by his concealment and provides a very suiting metaphor as to his intellectual enlightenment. The Invisible Man seeks to “see” himself more clearly be employing the use of lightbulbs, outside the clouding influence of outside opinion (SparkNotes Editors, par.11). He loves light; it is indispensable to him. “Perhaps you’ll think it strange that an invisible man should need light, desire light, love light. But maybe it is exactly because I am invisible. Light confirms my reality, gives birth to my form” (Ellison, p.6). In the light, he is able to see himself; he seeks out confirmation that he does, indeed, exist. However, before such an enlightenment can be achieved and before the narrator can have some voice in his destiny, he has to discard his old identities and illusions (Albert, par.40). As Søren Kierkegaard put it, in a formulation Ellison would certainly approve of, “the self must be broken in order to become itself” (Morel, p.185). It is necessary for the narrator to elude society underground, to descend physically and spiritually to the underworld, before he can ascend, one step closer to finding the true meaning of his existence.


While his physical descent is trivially ascertained, the spiritual is one obscured by its enigmatic and surreal nature. In it, the narrator, while listening to Louis Armstrong, mentions that he “not only entered the music but descended, like Dante, into its depths” (Ellison, p.9). This Dantean journey into the nether world dramatizes both the hero’s psychological disorientation and his subconscious quest of sculpting his identity and therefore power over his destiny (Butler, p.95). In it, he pictures a scene in a black church, where the voice of a black woman echoes out of the congregation. “Brothers and sisters”, she shouts, “my text this morning is ‘The Blackness of Blackness’” (Ellison, p.9). That Blackness could be interpreted as the unbearable, bellowing absence of black identity. This slave woman is one of the main characters who establish the centrality of ambivalence in black American existence. It is shown through her, that “the folk past hold the key to understanding black identity” (Hill, p.99), which encompasses a “double consciousness” for African-Americans who are identified both by being “Americans” and “Negroes”. As the eminent politician W.E.B. Du Bois stated, “one feels his twoness…two souls, two thoughts, two unreconciled strivings, as though straddled between two cultures” (qtd. In Patton, p.106). 


However, the Invisible Man seeks to find more meaning to his existence, in addition to the paradoxical duality in identity he is forced to adopt. “Old woman”, he asks, “what is this freedom you love so well?” (Ellison, p.11). Her endeavor to respond to his request brings forth her recollection of powerfully conflicting feelings, hence the ambiguity of her reply (Tate, p.3). The search for her definition of freedom brings forth physical infirmities; her head begins to ache and she cries out in pain. Her son comes to the rescue and commands him to ask himself next time he has such questions. He does just that by recalling what’s in his head, which results in him reconstructing the events of his life. In doing so, he becomes aware of the fact that to obtain freedom, he must act on it since, in essence, that freedom, contingent to him finding the meaning of his existence, is formed by his own actions. It is with this newly formed determination that the Invisible Man snaps out of his daydream and vows to hibernate as a “covert preparation for a more overt action” (Ellison, p.13).


####Existentialism and Louis Armstrong####

Throughout this drug-fueled daydream, Louis Armstrong’s blaring trumpet and pulsing tom-toms form the fine layer of sound through which the Invisible Man navigates the dark, chaotic tunnels of his subconscious. ‘What did I do / To be so black / And blue?’, Armstrong asks, and it is a recurring question whose meaning echoes triumphantly in the very heart of the prologue.


The choice of soundscape is hardly accidental – jazz and the blues have long been genres with deep existential allusions and connotations. In their improvisational themes, the performers create their essence, dig in deeper and deeper into musical themes that define them. Jazz is a natural outgrowth of spirituals, gospel, work shouts and other forms of early black songs (Gioia, p.63) and as such, it expresses concerns related to anxiety, dread, death, and time (Mudede, par.4). Blues, on the other hand, maintains a sense of chaos impinging on the individual. It has to be fought - and it has to be fought the whole time - otherwise chaos will take over (Scherman, p.81). This concept is very similar to that of perpetual despair in existentialism, which is a state the individual is in when any of the axiomatically ‘real’ aspects of his personality are vulnerable to subsidence. Between both genres, the common truth is that the separation of entities is acknowledged and the individuality of each is celebrated, through the conversations between the instruments and the interweaving paths of performers.


Therefore Louis Armstrong’s music functions as an index of cultivated sensibility and creative conflict (Wright, p.24), heading towards an existential resolution. While listening to Armstrong’s music, the narrator exists between it and outside of it, because of his invisibility. “Instead of the swift imperceptible flowing of time, you are aware of its nodes, those points where time stands still or from which it leaps ahead. And you slip into the breaks and look around” (Ellison, p.8). It is with this new way of listening to music that the Invisible Man descends into its depths, and this allegory, in conjunction with the story of the yokel beating a prizefighter in a boxing match, constitutes a very important realization for the Invisible Man: By using his invisibility and his newfound heightened sense of time and space he experiences in jazz, he is able to avoid societal classification, stereotypes, and labels, by migrating from that reality and spiritually reconstructing another one - where these obstacles do not exist (Peterson, par.6). This results in a blank slate through which the Invisible Man can find his true existence away from the castigating imperatives of reality, in a true existence precedes essence fashion.


####Why Invisible Man is not a truly existential novel####


It is evident from the observations above that existentialism is a major, recurring theme in the prologue, for the Invisible Man frequently duels on questions pertaining to the meaning of his existence, and alludes to the importance of one’s individuality and freedom of thought and action over society’s overwhelming, admonishing imperatives on the individual. The Invisible Man seeks to find his true self; to control his destiny through intellectual enlightenment. However he also realizes that none of this is enough without action on his behalf, which is why he overtly prepares for a conflict with society’s sleepwalkers. In his quest for individual meaning and truth of self, he must elude the impositions of society, and separate his individual existence from his essence. He does that physically by escaping underground, and spiritually by distancing and subsequently detaching himself from society. It is this very descent to the underworld and the meaning he gives to light that allude to the spiritual enlightenment he must attain before he can ascend once more to the world. This journey from darkness to illumination is the focal point of the prologue, and by extension, the novel, with all the existentialist foundations, conflicts and resolutions it encompasses.


However, even with all these existential notions and allusions discussed above, one could argue that it is near impossible for Ellison or indeed any Afro-American writer to make a complete separation between the existence and essence, and subsequently a universal existentialist statement. At that time, writing about escaping society and self-identity was impossible not only for Afro-Americans but also ethnic authors to do, “without acknowledging the social conditions that assaulted and helped define it” (Berkovitch, p.249). In a period where social acceptance remained problematic and racial segregation prominent in every New York neighborhood, purely personal writing was a luxury the ethnic writer could scarcely afford. In such a reality of epidermal discrimination, adopting an “American” identity was insufficient. As much as writers such as Ralph Ellison tried to escape it, this identity could never “fully substitute their communal roots, or their own history, which was indelibly imprinted on them from the beginnings of their lives” (Berkovitch, p.249). Ellison, and in extension the narrator, is already balancing on a tightrope that is his “double consciousness” (qtd. In Patton, p. 106) of being simultaneously an “American”, and a “Negro” (Collins, p.59). It is this phenomenon that can be seen as a factor that obstructed Invisible Man from attaining a truly existentialist status among books such as Albert Camus’ The Stranger, which exemplified and helped define the genre. Ultimately, by virtue of their race and its underlying socio-economic implications at the time, these writers found themselves overwhelmed by an existentialist claustrophobia. Perhaps they were never able to escape from this in their lifespans, and it comes down to future audiences to embrace the truly universal existentialist sentiment in their works.  

